Tired of the cruel mistreatment they endured from their wicked stepmother, who was also a witch, a brother and sister ran away from home one day. They wandered off into the countryside and spent the night in the woods. When the next morning came, the boy was thirsty and they went on the lookout for a spring of clear water. Their stepmother had already discovered their escape however, and bewitched all the springs in the forest. He was about to drink from one, when his sister heard how its rushing sound said "Whoever drinks from me will become a tiger."
Desperately, the girl begged her brother not to drink from the spring, lest he transform into a tiger and tear her to pieces. So they went back on their way, but when they came to the second spring the girl heard it say, "Whoever drinks from me will become a wolf." Again, she desperately tried to prevent her brother from drinking from it. Reluctantly, he eventually agreed to her pleas but insisted he would drink from the next spring they encountered. And so they arrived at the third spring, and the girl overheard the rushing water cry, "Whoever drinks from me will become a deer." But it was too late, because her brother had already drank from it, and changed into a deer.




Sculpture „Brother and Sister“, created in 1970 by Katharina Szelinski-Singer.


As the initial feeling of despair cleared up, the children decided to stay and live in the woods forever. The girl would take care of her brother, and tied her gold chain around his neck. They went to live in a little house deep within the woods and lived there happily for some years, until they were disturbed one day by a hunting party and the King himself who had followed the strange deer home. Upon seeing the beautiful girl, he immediately asked her to marry him and she accepted. Thus she became Queen and they all went to live happily in the King's castle. Time passed and the Queen gave birth to a son.
Their stepmother however soon discovered that they were still alive and plotted against them. One night, she killed the Queen and replaced her with her own disfigured daughter (whom she had transformed to resemble her). When the Queen's ghost secretly visited her baby's bedside for three consecutive nights however, the King caught on and her stepmother's evil plan was exposed.
The Queen came back to life and her stepfamily was tried for their crimes. The daughter was banished into the woods where she was torn to pieces by wild animals and her mother was burned at the stake. At the exact moment of her death, the boy became human again and at long last, the family was reunited. They all lived happily ever after.